# Spot a Grandis

This app is developed to help track the progress of the invasive species of 
Phelsuma Grandis in Mauritius (and potentially other islands in the indian 
ocean). It is based on the wonderful Quasar framework and is compiled using
Cordova to become a semi-native app.

## About the Grandis

Invasive species, such as the Madagascar giant day gecko (Phelsuma grandis), 
threaten native ecosystems. Island ecosystems, such as in Mauritius, are 
especially vulnerable, as they have evolved in relative isolation. In the 
Mascarenes, many animal and plant species have gone extinct since the arrival 
of humans on the islands. Habitat destruction and invasive species were, and 
still are among the main drivers of species extinction on the Mascarenes.
Feral cats, dogs, and rats are a huge threat to native birds, reptiles, and 
plants: they feed on plant seeds and flowers, on eggs, and juvenile and adult 
animals.

In the 1990s, Phelsuma grandis arrived in Mauritius from Madagascar, most 
likely through the pet trade. Some of these geckos escaped, and have since 
established a population in Mauritius, which has been linked to a decrease in 
the population of endemic Phelsuma day geckos.

Mauritius has four endemic species of Phelsuma day geckos on its mainland: The 
Mauritius lowland forest day gecko (Phelsuma guimbeaui), the Mauritius upland 
forest day gecko (Phelsuma rosagularis), the Blue-tailed day gecko (Phelsuma 
cepediana), and the Mauritius ornate day gecko (Phelsuma ornata). These pretty 
and colorful geckos have important functions in the forest ecosystem: they are 
pollinators of often highly adapted flowers, they are predators if insects, and 
prey for endemic birds.

As all of these beautiful geckos are endemic to Mauritius (meaning they only 
live in Mauritius), their populations are relatively small, and they are 
endangered. Phelsuma grandis, the invasive species from Madagascar, is a big 
threat for these endemic geckos, mainly because it is much bigger. It will thus 
compete with the endemic geckos for habitat, but also predate on them, and kill 
young endemic geckos.

Currently it is assumed that Phelsuma grandis’ populations mainly occur in the 
settled areas of Mauritius. However, should these populations start to spread 
into the forests, and infringe on the already sparse habitat of the other 
endemic day geckos, especially Phelsuma guimbeaui and rosagularis, the 
consequences for these species could be disastrous.

This why we built this app, and why we need your help: monitoring Phelsuma 
grandis is the first step to protecting Mauritius’ precious endemic geckos. And 
in order to effectively protect them, we need to know if and where they are 
particularly threatened. Only then can countermeasures be planned effectively. 
Please help us to protect endemic geckos! If you see a Phelsuma grandis, report 
your observations here!
